St Bertrandde Comminges is a decaved town on the
 spurs ofthePyrenees?notvery far from Toulouse? and
stillnearerto Bagneresde4Luchon Itwas the site ofa
bishopric until the Revolution? and has a cathedral
which is visitedby acertainnumber oftourists In the
 t5mgcH8g?nBo5bmu5mvwdu this oldeworld
 place L I can hardlv dignifv it with the name of city?
for there are not a thousand inhabitants. He was a
Cambridge man? who hadcome speciallv from Tou.
louse to see St Bertrands Church. andhad left two
friends. who wereless keen archaeologists than him.
self? in theirhote1atToulouee. underpromiseto ioin
him on the following morning. Half an hour at the
church would satisfy the? and all three could then
 pursue their journev inthe directionofAuch Butour
Englishman had come earlv on the dav in auestion.
 andproposed to himselfto fill a notebook and to use
several dozens of plates in the process ofdescribing
 and photographing everv corner of the wonderful
 church that dominates theIirtchillofCommingcs In
order to carrv out this design satisfactorily? it was
necessary to monopolise the verger ofthe church for
the dav. .The verger or sacristan I prefer the latter
appellation? inaccurate as it maybe?was accordingly
sent for bv the somewhat brusaue ladv who keeps the
inn of the Chapeau Rouge? and when he came? the
Englishman found him an unexpectedly interesting
obiect ofstudy. It was not in thepersonal appearance
 ofthe little?dry? wizcnedoldmanthat the interest lay?
